What is white privilege? According to many, White Privilege is when a white individual has unfair advantages in society and the majority makes positive assumptions about an individual that is “White”. Does it exist? Clearly. I am not here to argue against White Privilege but rather show that the current academic mainstream approach and solution we have, is not only immoral, but it also is not beneficial by not only not getting anything done but showing that it does more harm that it does good.
	Sociologists have two goals. To call out, claim, show, and express that white privilege and its clear unfair advantages it gives to white people over blacks or other minorities exists. Secondly, to fix this imbalance in society by lessening of the privilege amongst white men. 
	This idea of lessening of one’s own advantages is nonetheless acting out of unfairness to achieve fairness. Which ultimately, leads to the other group of people to feel the weight. And again, if we profess to strive for fairness and equality, one cannot use ways or avenues or even actions of unfairness to achieve this perceived fairness and equality. By using inequality to create equality the entire idea of equality is thrown out the window. By achieving equality in ways of inequality you are directly playing a role in that which you seek to destroy. 
	We must also be careful in how these things are expressed. Because saying that another’s disadvantaged life is due to how someone simply lives their life. That even the simple aspects of how one eats or where one travels to (even though there is no direct connection to the simple living of a white man and the disadvantages of minorities) can have a terribly lasting effect on one’s own perception. This leads to so much self-hatred and we see that self-hatred can lead to suicide, depression, anxiety and many mental health issues.
	And because of this perspective one can see this has indubitably led to the hatred of white people due to advantages that they did not ask for yet received. A term coined by the young adults called “white hate” which allows one to not only disagree with this privilege but essentially blame these white men for their own disadvantages and increasingly begin to hate them based on circumstances that they had no say over. 
	In a perfect world, of course, everything is evenly distributed and taken care of. However, this may be wishful thinking, but we should still be searching and working towards the ideal. But this completely equal society will never be attainable because of the lack of homogeneity found in the modern world.
	Instead of focusing on equality we should be a society equally based off of mercy and grace as well as needed justice and equality. In a society where mercy and forgiveness lives then, one cannot find a reason to have an advantage over the other. If we are all equally forgiven, we both live in a state of showing mercy and are on the same boat. Being forgiven makes us all equal for we have all made mistakes and reached a place of unmerited forgiveness.
	Another area in which I choose to challenge the current perception of white privilege is the idea of helping someone is seen as “whiteness.” According to an excerpt in White Privilege Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack by Peggy Mcintosh she says “ whites are taught to think of their lives as morally neutral, normative, and average, and also ideal, so that when we work to benefit others, this is seen as work which allow “ them ” to be more like “ us ”.
	There is so much to unpack here. I shall start with the presuppositions that provide a foundation for this statement to be made. Then I will talk about how much err was made by this statement. 
	We have come to understand that colonization is an overall evil. And it was supposedly (proven to be false by many historical accounts but holds slight merit due to the fact that it was only a fraction of the reason) promoted to spread the Catholic Church. We now know that it was prompted to prove that the earth was indeed round and to increase the wealth of Spaniards and the Portuguese as well as to show naval supremacy over the British. So namely the first foundational presupposition is that colonization of the Americas is an overall evil due to the forceful spread of the Catholic religion. 
	If you then are able to admit that the spread of this religion was an evil then one must admit and concede that the transfer of these ideas over the ideas of the indigenous is also an overall evil. This is seen as an evil only in a world where morality has become relative. If a society deems something as righteous that otherwise one may deem as unrighteous then in that specific society that, which one deems as unrighteous, is indeed righteous and morally permissible. 
	To continue to uphold this idea, one must believe in moral relativism. That morality and those things which we find as good or bad are solely based on our own local societies’ rules and norms. That morality is completely a social construct. However, this ideology simply cannot exist in our world today. To maintain this ideology is to maintain that there is no absolute morality. Meaning, rape, murder, and abuse of any kind can and will be permissible because that which is good is made up by mankind. However, we can innately show that this is simply not the case. No matter where you are from or what you believe one can say without a doubt that rape is wrong. And to say that it’s an exception is to say that then there is absolutism in morality. As humans there is an innate belief present in all, that things such as these atrocities are seen not only as impermissible but as a true overall evil. One cannot maintain that atrocities that are so obviously evil must be deemed as evil for all while simultaneously maintaining that morality is relative. 
The reason many search to express and spread Christianity through mission trips and the establishment of missionaries and churches across the globe is based on the idea that we must spread this gospel, love, mercy, and grace to all. Not only that but also seek to save people from their sins, which only Christ can do. In this spreading of ideas, good ideas, we simultaneously seek the truth. If there is a moral obligation to commit to justice, forgiveness, and love, then this heightened living should be spread for the betterment of mankind. 
	Being right isn’t a white thing. Being moral and shewing righteousness is not attached to a specific race or ethnicity. But rather, it is truth. Rape murder and Hatred go beyond any society and if moral relativism is indeed true then Rape can be allowed and permissible in societies which deem it as righteous. But since it is not, then doing and teaching what is right is not a white thing but rather it is objectively true. 


